Design Patterns

SOLID Design Principles: applies to class/module/fn (any block of collective code)
    - Single Responsibility : a class should be responsibile to only one actor/stakeholder - which drives any reason to change the class. a class should do only one job/Responsibility and a change to class should happen only because there is a change to it's responsibility.
    - Open-Closed           : open for extension, closed for change/modification. Behavior should be extendable without altering code. Open to extension via inheritance/delegate fn; close for altering (defines an interface for it's usage). E.g. each Shape defines how to compute it's area; AreaCalculator has a shape attribute which uses "interface" defined on shape to ensure they have area() method in it.
    - Liskov Substitution   : A "property" that applies to Type T or a BasClass, will also to each subclass. i.e. Derived class is Substitutable for base class. Behavioural sub-typing.
    - Interface Segregation : classes should implement interfaces only which are used by them i.e. don't force unneccesaary interfaces upon them. E.g. separate AreaCalculator & VolumeCalculator interfaces instead of clubbing them together. 3D objects can implement both interfaces, while 2D object can implement only for area.
    - Dependency Inversion  : High-level class should not depend on low-level; they should both depend on interfaces/abstraction. Abstraction should not depend on details/concretions but rather vice-versa details on abstracts. Often we think of making smaller utility fn/method to fulfil higher level fn but this creaet higly coupled system; instead use interface between high-level and lower-level. Allows upper layers to use other implementations of lower levels. Common to have an "adapter" between service & abstraction. 

Creational Design Patterns: Builder, Factories (Factory Method and Abstract Factory), Prototype and Singleton
    Builder: construct complex (different) objects in steps.
            Complex due to multiple fields and/or nested objects.
            Move object construction code out of class and into Builder object.
            Organize construction into steps (buildA, buildB, buildC) and execute the steps you need (ex. buildAC).
            Director (optional):: builder steps put in separate class. Director defines order of building; Builder provides implementation.
            Use to:
                o get rid of telescoping constructor (multiple or many argument constructor)
                o to create different representations of product. Construction step differs in details (e.g. made of Stone/Wood).
                o construct complex objects - details wrapped in Director class. Call step recusively to create trees.
        b = new ConcreteBuilderA()  # based off an interface (reset, buildStepA, buildStepB.., buildStepZ)
                    # results in Product1 (getResult :: return this.result, reset :: newProduct1, buildStepA,...buildStepZ)
                    # client code can call ConcreteBuilderA directly (reset, stepsA-Z) ..or use Director
        d = new Director(b) # (Director(builder), changeBuilder(builder), make(typeA..Z) :: if simpleA then buildA only if complexA then (buildA, buildA2) )
        d.reset()
        d.make()
        ProductA pa = d.getResult()

    Factory Method (Virtual constructor): interface for creating objects in superclass but subclasses can alter type of object created.
            New replaced by factory method that produces new objects in subclass or provide basic default object. 
            Override Factory method in subclass to produce different products (from same baseclass/interface).
            Use to:
                o Use when you don't know exact types/dependeny objects
                o To provide a way to extend internal components (reduce construction code to single factory method for overriding)
                o Reuse existing objects instead of creating new (memory saving) e.g. pool
        Creator class has an abstract factory method and other operations that interface that are assumed from such to-be-created objects e.g. product = self.factory_method() && product.do_something().
        Subclasses defined factory_method to return ConcreteProductA.
        Product interface defines do_something()...and each productA/B/C implements do_something.
        Client code can use Creator and Product interface.

    Abstract Factory:
            Interfaces for product (concrete ProductA, ProductB)
            Next Interface (abstract factory) is list of methods on product (rather family of related/similar products).
            Client code works with chosen-factory & interface methods.
            Use to:
            o Make code for families of related product and code to interface than concrete classes (allows easy expansion/parallel dev).
            o Class with multiple factory methods that blurs primary responsibility (class dealing with multiple product types)  


Structrural Design Patterns: Adapter, Bridge, Composite, Decorator, Façade, Flyweight and Proxy
        Adapater: Allow incompatible interfaces to collaborate. E.g. EU-US power adapter
            o when many subclasses lack common functionality that can't be added to superclass. Adapter comes inbetween to address missing functionality. 

        Decorator: Decorator obj linked to target object and delegates all requet to target but alters the result/pre/post operation. E.g. Do what should be done + sendSMS.
            o Assign extra behavior at runtime to objects without changing code
            o When extending behavior through inheritance is not possible/awkward.
            Why not inheritance? Inheritance is static; can't alter behavior at runtime. Only replace with subclass objects. Multiple inheritance may not be allowed in language.

        Facade: provides simplified interface to a complex sub-system. May limit functionality
            o to have limited but straight forward interface to complex system (e.g. setting up config/boiler plate fn)
            o make layers of facade where each layer reduces coupling or if facade itself is becoming too complex (don't be a God object).

Behavioral Design Patterns: Chain of Responsibility, Command, Interpreter, Iterator, Mediator, Memento, Observer, State, Strategy, Template Method and Visitor
        Observer: aka Subscriber; allows to define a subscription to notify multiple Observers of any events on objects they are observing.
        
        Command: Turn request into object with all info. Use to pass as arg or add to queue etc.
            e.g. waiter between customer/chef with paper (object)

        Strategy: different algorithm in different classes (Strategy). Based on context, object decides on which strategy/algo to use.
        
        Iterator: allows to traverese elements of a colleciton without exposing underlying representation.

        Mediator: reduce chaotic dependeny between objects (of a system). All communications via mediator only. e.g. Air Traffic Controller. Hub/spoke model.
                Leads to decoupling with each component only passing msg to Mediator object to action on. Microservices architecture.
